The Grainger College of Engineering is the engineering college of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. It was established in 1868 and is considered one of the original units of the school.

Every engineering program in the college is ranked among the best in the US.[1] and in the world.[2][3] The department has historically spearheaded worldwide innovation in technology with inventions such as the transistor, the integrated circuit, the LED, the first web browsers (Mosaic and Netscape), and (JavaScript) all produced by students, faculty or alumni of the college. Engineering alumni founded Mozilla, AMD, PayPal, Yelp, YouTube, Tesla and Oracle.

Campus
The College of Engineering is located at the northern terminus of the University of Illinois occupying the Bardeen Quadrangle, the Beckman Quadrangle, and many nearby areas. Green Street almost perfectly divides the Engineering campus from the rest of the University, so engineers and the College of Engineering are often referred to as "North of Green."

Engineering Hall serves as the primary anchor point for the College of Engineering and houses administrative offices as well as academic facilities. Built in 1894, it is the oldest surviving building on the Engineering portion of campus. It was designed by George Bullard, a University alumnus as part of a University held architecture competition and is an example of the Renaissance Revival style of architecture.

The Bardeen Quad is home to the Grainger Engineering Library, the largest engineering library in the world with over 260,000 physical volumes and a substantial electronic repository. The building itself cost nearly $30 million and has 135,000 square feet (13,000 m²) of floor space. It serves in excess of 1.5 million people annually. It offers services including room reservations, computers, printing, scanning, copying, tutoring, and technology loans.[4]

On April 15, 2019, the College of Engineering was named Grainger College of Engineering after the Grainger Foundation. The Grainger Foundation donated $100 million and an overall donation of $300 million.
